Create a pairing session template (#11)
tupleapp/pair-programming-guide: _pages/a-pairing-session-template.md

---
layout: default
title: A Pairing Session Template
permalink: /template
meta: A template to help guide your pair programming session
---

{% include article-top.html %}

Here's a template for your next pairing session:

```
1. [ ] Agree on the high-level goal out loud.
2. [ ] Break the work into a handful of tasks.
3. [ ] Come up with a preliminary ordering for those tasks.
4. [ ] Decide your driver/navigator swapping strategy.
5. [ ] Configure git to share credit.
6. [ ] Eliminate distractions.
7. [ ] Work.
8. [ ] Analyze the session.

> ```

Reviewer: Not sure if it's intentional, but I noticed most of the check list items are phrased differently than the headlines below. Might be worth unifying them for clarity.

Let's talk more about each step.

## 1. Agree on the high-level goal

State **out loud** what you hope to accomplish at a high level.

You wouldn't think it'd be possible for two people to start pairing without agreement about where they're headed, but it's surprisingly easy.

## 2. Break the goal into smaller tasks and order them

It's worth trying to break your high-level goal into a handful of smaller steps.

This has a number of benefits:

- It makes the goal less intimidating.
- You'll spot dead ends and pitfalls more easily.

> - You can sort your task list by priority.

Reviewer 2: Also, it provides a nice parking lot.  When you're in the middle of the work flow, something might occur to the pair: "Oh, we should probably do X as well for this".  Having an existing task list lets you jot down the note or to-do without getting too off-track

- You're more likely to notice that accomplishing task C would make B easier, and reorder appropriately.

> - You can decide on a task based on your current energy levels.

Reviewer 2: One more benefit I would suggest: If the thing you're hoping to accomplish takes more than one day or one pairing session, a paper trail of tasks makes it easier to remember where to pick up where you left off

[Some folks](https://www.jamesshore.com/Agile-Book/pair_programming.html) like
to write each task on its own index card. The stack of them lives in front of the navigator.
Each card can be a nice home for notes or ideas to bring up when there is a break in

> the action.

Reviewer 2: Also, it can be a useful technique to have some method set up of disposing of completed cards :) (for example: a post-it collection jar or graveyard) Not only does this prevent the mess of post-its and index cards that litter my desk and monitor sometimes, it can be rewarding to have a mini ritual for celebrating a completed task

## 3. Decide what will trigger a driver/navigator swap

> If you don't have strong opinions, I strongly recommend the Pomodoro Technique:

Reviewer: This wording feels a little awkward to me. Maybe:

```suggestion
Unless you already know what works best for you, I strongly recommend the Pomodoro Technique:
```

1. Code for 25 minutes.
2. Take a 5 minute break.
3. Switch drivers.

Other [pair programming styles](/pair-programming-guide-styles) exist if you wish to try them.

## 4. Configure git to share credit

If two of you work on some code, both your names should appear on the commit.

> Here's [a handy guide](https://help.github.com/articles/creating-a-commit-with-multiple-authors/) to configuring git appropriately.

Reviewer 2: Could be worth calling out some of the other pairing commit options out there?  Some I've used include [git pair](https://github.com/chrisk/git-pair), [git duet](https://github.com/git-duet/git-duet), and [git-together](https://github.com/kejadlen/git-together)

Bonus: GitHub understands this natively and will give you both credit for the commit.

## 5. Eliminate distractions

Show respect for your pair and the work you're about to do.

- Don't bring your phone. Silence it if you do.
- Disable notifications on the machine you're using to pair.
- Close email/Slack/Twitter/IRC. Never keep something distracting on a second monitor.

## 6. Work

Do the work!

Don't forget:

- *When navigating:* ask questions rather than making demands.

> - *When driving:* dictate what you're doing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- *When driving:* dictate what you're doing and why.
```

- Err on the side of over-communication.
- Take lots of breaks.
- Swap roles frequently.
- Do the simplest thing that could possibly work (for now).
- Avoid these [pairing antipatterns](/pair-programming-guide/antipatterns).

## 7. Debrief

Spend a few minutes after your session reflecting on the experience.

First, discuss what went well.

> Then, consider what would make the next session 1% better.

Reviewer 2: Why 1%?  I haven't heard this retro approach before and I'm curious about what is meant here

Author: Arbitrary! I just want people to focus on finding some small win for next time.

> Possible areas for improvement:

Reviewer 2: I really like this section!! Provides a helpful framework for analysis
